Control of Gene
Expression
(Albert’s textbook Chapter 6&7)

2026/04/23

Topics
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢
➢

The structure and function of RNA
RNA transcription
RNA processing
Transcription regulators
Cell diversity and cell memory
Post-transcriptional regulations
Non-coding RNAs

One Genome, Many Cell Types

One Genome
Spatiotemporal
Gene Expression
and Regulation
Diverse Cell Types

www.humancellatlas.org

FROM DNA TO PROTEIN: GENE EXPRESSION

RNA Molecule
Transcription: DNA to RNA
Translation: RNA to Protein

How Cells Read the Genome: From DNA to Protein

The Central Dogma

One strand of the
DNA double helix
acts as a template.
Same language
with different
format

Different
languages

Figure 6-1, 6-3 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

The complimentary
single-stranded
transcript

RNA Molecules Differ from DNA Chemically

an additional
–OH group

absence of a
–CH3 group

Figure 6-4, 6-5, 6-6 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

The absence of a methyl
group in U does not affect
base-pairing; thus, U-A
base pairs closely
resemble T-A base pairs.

RNA Is Single-stranded and Can Fold Into Specific Structures
Slight chemical differences but
dramatical structure differences.

Conventional
base-pairing

Non-conventional
base-pairing

The complex three-dimensional
shapes allow some RNA
molecules to have precise
structural and catalytic functions.
Figure 6-4, 6-7 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

The Process of RNA Transcription

• Released immediately from
the DNA template.
• Only copied from a region of
the DNA therefore much
shorter than DNA.
RNA
polymerase

RNA Polymerases Carry Out
Transcription

Figure 6-9, 6-10 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

• Many molecules of RNA are
simultaneously transcribed
from a gene.

The Transcription Cycle of Bacterial RNA Polymerase

Promoter
Transcription
Bubble

Consensus nucleotide sequence and sequence
logo for the major class of E. coli promoters.

holoenzyme
Promoter sequences are asymmetric and the
polymerase can synthesize RNA only in the 5ʹto-3ʹ direction, so the promoter orientation
specifies the strand to be used as a template.

Terminator

Figure 6-11,12,13 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Eukaryotic cells Have Three RNA Polymerases
Structural similarity between a
bacterial RNA polymerase and a
eukaryotic RNA polymerase II.

~50 nt/s

RNA
polymerase

structurally
similar

Figure 6-9, 6-14 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

RNA Polymerase II Requires a Set of General Transcription Factors

Transcription initiation complex (TIC)

distortion

C-terminal
domain (CTD)

•
•
•

“general” because they are needed at nearly all promoters used by RNA polymerase II.
TFII stands for “transcription factor for polymerase II.
Carry out functions equivalent to those of the sigma factor in bacteria.

Figure 6-15, 6-17 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Eukaryotic Transcription Initiation Requires More Proteins

DNA in eukaryotic cells is
packaged into nucleosomes and
higher-order chromatin structures.

To attract RNA
polymerase II

Hundreds to
thousands of bps

Figure 6-18 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Increase access to
the DNA in chromatin

Transcription Creates Superhelical Tension

In eukaryotes, DNA
topoisomerase enzymes
rapidly remove this
superhelical tension.

RNA polymerase creates
superhelical tension as it
moves along DNA.

Figure 6-19 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Cells Produce Different Categories of RNA Molecules

noncoding RNAs
• Most of the RNA in cells is rRNA.
• mRNA comprises only 3–5% of the total RNA in a typical mammalian cell.
• On average only 10–15 molecules of each mRNA species in each cell.

Transcription In Eukaryotic Cells Is More Complex

➢ mRNA molecule contains both
coding (exon) and noncoding
(intron) sequences;
➢ mRNA molecules need to be
processed in multiple ways;
➢ Mature mRNA need to be
transported from the nucleus to
the cytoplasm.

Figure 6-20 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Transcription In Eukaryotic Cells Is More Complex
RNA Processing

Figure 6-21A, 6-22 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Transcription elongation in
eukaryotes is tightly
coupled to RNA processing.

RNA Capping Is the First Modification of Eukaryotic Pre-mRNAs
5’ Capping

about 25
nucleotides of RNA

Phosphatase

Guanyl transferase

Methyltransferase

Methyltransferase

Figure 6-21B, 6-23 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

RNA Splicing Removes Intron Sequences from Pre-mRNAs
The pre-mRNA
splicing reaction

alternative splicing

Figure 6-25, 6-26 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

RNA Splicing Shows Remarkable Plasticity

Splicing Errors

Figure 6-30, 6-33 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

10% of point mutations in
human diseases produce
aberrant splicing of the gene
containing the mutation

RNA-Processing Enzymes Generate the 3ʹ End of Eukaryotic mRNAs
CPSF： cleavage and
polyadenylation specificity factor
CSTF： cleavage stimulation factor

No template needed

Variable length around 200 nt
Figure 6-35 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

The Nucleus Contains a Variety of Subnuclear Aggregates

The main function of these aggregates is to bring
components together at high concentration in order
to speed up their assembly.
“Transcription Factory”

Figure 6-46, 6-47 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Green: newly synthesized DNA
Red: newly synthesized RNA

An mRNA Sequence Is Decoded in Sets of Three Nucleotides
The genetic code: universal in all present-day organisms

transfer RNAs (tRNAs)

Figure 6-48, 6-49, 6-50A Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

reading frames

Different Cell Types Synthesize Different Sets of RNAs and Proteins

RNA

A cell can change (or regulate) the
expression of each of its genes by
controlling the production of its RNA.

Protein
Red are common
Blue are specific

Fascinating challenges:
➢ Variations between organisms
➢ Products beyond proteins
➢ Chaotic genome organizations

Figure 6-3, 7-3, 7-4 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

➢ Multiple-levels regulation

There Are Many Steps From DNA to Protein

• Cells can change the levels of their proteins according to their needs.
• Gene expression can be regulated at many of the steps in the pathway
from DNA to RNA to protein.
• Any or all of the steps in this figure could be regulated for each
individual protein.
Figure 7-5 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

CONTROL OF TRANSCRIPTION BY SEQUENCESPECIFIC DNA-BINDING PROTEINS

Transcription Regulators
cis-regulatory Sequences

Transcription Regulators Contain Structural Motifs That Can Read DNA
Sequences

Each transcription regulator makes a series of contacts with the DNA,
involving hydrogen bonds, ionic bonds, and hydrophobic interactions.
Majority of their
contacts with
the major
groove

Figure 7-8 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Transcription Regulators And cis-regulatory Sequences
CRS Logo: A collection of
closely related DNA sequences

Dimerization of transcription regulators increases
their affinity and specificity for DNA.

Figure 7-9 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Transcription Regulators Bind Cooperatively to DNA
Non-cooperative binding

Cooperative binding
Monomers in solution

Weak interaction

Binding of the
substrate or ligand at
one binding site
affects the affinity of
other sites
exponential

sigmoidal
all-or-none

Figure 7-10 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Nucleosome Structure Promotes Cooperative Binding of Transcription
Regulators

Increase the affinity of a second
transcription regulator for a nearby
cis-regulatory sequence
Figure 7-11 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

The Tryptophan Repressor Switches Genes Off
A cluster of bacterial genes can be transcribed from a single promoter.
Operon

The bacterium can respond very rapidly to a rise or fall in tryptophan concentration.
Figure 7-12, 7-13 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Repressors Turn Genes Off and Activators Turn Them On

controlled by the interaction of a
metabolite or other small molecule

Figure 7-14 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

An Activator and a Repressor Control the Lac Operon

Logic Gate

CAP activator

Only in this case

Figure 7-15 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

DNA Looping Can Occur During Bacterial Gene Regulation

DNA looping occurs in the regulation of nearly every eukaryotic gene.
Figure 7-16 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

A Eukaryotic Gene Control Region Consists of a Promoter Plus
Many cis-Regulatory Sequences

Multiple transcription regulators
Multiple cis-regulatory sequences
More DNA looping
Chromosome structure

Figure 7-17 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Eukaryotic Transcription Regulators Work in Groups

Do not recognize specific
DNA sequences directly

Figure 7-18 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Eukaryotic Transcription Activators Direct the Modification of Local
Chromatin Structure

Figure 7-19 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Transcription Activators Work Synergistically
Transcriptional synergy: a greater than additive effect
of multiple activators working together.

1+1>>2

Figure 7-22 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Eukaryotic Transcription Repressors Can Inhibit Transcription in
Several Ways

Figure 7-23 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Insulator DNA Sequences Prevent Eukaryotic Transcription
Regulators from Influencing Distant Genes

Localization of a Drosophila insulator-binding protein on polytene chromosomes

interband

Polytene chromosomes

Figure 7-24, 7-25 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Insulator protein

MOLECULAR GENETIC MECHANISMS THAT CREATE
AND MAINTAIN SPECIALIZED CELL TYPES

Cell Diversity
Cell Memory
Transcription Regulation Circuits

Complex Genetic Switches That Regulate Drosophila Development
Are Built Up from Smaller Molecules
The non-uniform distribution of transcription
regulators in an early Drosophila embryo

Giant protein (red)

syncytium

Seven stripes of Eve protein (green)

The modular construction of the Eve gene regulatory region

reporter
Figure 7-26, 7-27, 7-28 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

The Drosophila Eve Gene Is Regulated by Combinatorial Controls
The non-uniform distribution of transcription
regulators in an early Drosophila embryo

Giant protein (red)

syncytium

Seven stripes of Eve protein (green)

Only in those nuclei located where the
levels of both Bicoid and Hunchback are
high and both Krüppel and Giant are absent.
Figure 7-29, 7-30 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

positional information

Transcription Regulators Are Controlled in Eukaryotic Cells

Figure 7-32 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Combinatorial Gene Control Creates Many Different Cell Types

The context matters.
The history matters.
Combinatorial gene control
causes the effect of adding a
new transcription regulator to
a cell to depend on that cell’s
past history, since it is this
history that determines which
transcription regulators are
already present.
Figure 7-33 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Transcription Regulators For The Specification of Cell Types

Liver cells grown in culture were
converted into neuronal cells via
the artificial expression of three
nerve-specific transcription
regulators.

Expression of the
Drosophila Eyeless
gene in precursor cells
of the leg triggers the
development of an eye
on the leg.

Figure 7-34, 7-35 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Specialized Cell Types Can Be Experimentally Reprogrammed to Become
Pluripotent Stem Cells

induced
Pluripotent
Stem Cells
(iPSCs)

Master
Transcription
Regulators

A portion of the transcription network
specifying embryonic stem cells.

Figure 7-76, 7-37A Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

The Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine 2012

Differentiated Cells Maintain Their Identity

“self-sustaining”

A positive feedback loop
can create cell memory

Figure 7-39, 7-37B Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Transcription Circuits Allow the Cell to Carry Out Logic Operations

Figure 7-40, 7-41, 7-42 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Transcription Circuits Allow the Cell to Carry Out Logic Operations

Network

A feed-forward loop can
measure the duration of
a signal

Figure 7-40, 7-41, 7-42 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

MECHANISMS THAT REINFORCE CELL MEMORY

DNA Methylation
Genomic Imprinting
X Chromosome Inactivation

Patterns of DNA Methylation Can Be Inherited When Vertebrate Cells Divide

Figure 7-43, 7-44, 7-47 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

•

During evolution, more than
three out of every four CGs
have been lost.

•

The remaining CG
sequences are very unevenly
distributed in the selected
regions called CG islands.

•

60% of human protein-coding
genes have promoters
embedded in CG islands.

Genomic Imprinting
Genomic imprinting is an
epigenetic phenomenon which
results in the monoallelic
expression of a gene depending
on the parental origin.
Roughly 300 genes are
imprinted in humans.

The Genetic Conflict Hypothesis
Ritu, Giri P., Mohapatra B. (2018) Genomic Imprinting. In: Vonk J., Shackelford T. (eds) Encyclopedia of Animal Cognition and Behavior

Mechanisms of Imprinting

Figure 7-49 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Chromosome-Wide Alterations in Chromatin Structure Can Be Inherited

dosage
compensation
mechanism
Random

mosaics phenotype

Calico female cat
Figure 7-50 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Mammalian X-chromosome Inactivation

X-inactivation center
(XIC)
～20,000 nt lncRNA

About 10% of the genes on the X chromosome (including Xist itself )
escape this silencing and remain active.
Figure 7-52 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

POST-TRANSCRIPTIONAL CONTROLS

Alternative RNA Splicing
3’ Cleavage
RNA Editing
UTR Control
mRNA Decay

Post-transcriptional Controls of Gene Expression

Figure 7-54 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Negative And Positive Control of Alternative RNA Splicing
Alternative RNA Splicing

Negative Control

Positive Control

Figure 7-56, 7-58 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

A Change in the Site of RNA Transcript Cleavage and Poly-A Addition
Can Change the C-terminus of a Protein
alternative cleavage and polyadenylation sites

Figure 7-59 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

RNA Editing Can Change the Meaning of the RNA Message
adenine to inosine
(A-to-I editing)

ADAR (adenosine
deaminase acting
on RNA)

I pairs with C

Figure 7-60, 7-61 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

cytosine to uracil
(C-to-U editing)

RNA Editing Can Change the Meaning of the RNA Message
adenine to inosine
(A-to-I editing)

cytosine to uracil
(C-to-U editing)

ADAR (adenosine
deaminase acting
on RNA)

I pairs with C

Leveraging Endogenous ADAR
Protein For Targeted RNA Editing

Figure 7-60, 7-61 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Yi et al., Nat Biotechnology, 2022
Qu et al., Nat Biotechnology, 2019

Untranslated Regions of mRNAs Control Their Translation

Shine–Dalgarno sequence

Riboswitches are short sequences of
RNA that change their conformation
on binding small molecules.
Figure 7-66 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Changes in mRNA Stability Can Regulate Gene Expression
Timer
Eukaryotic mRNA decay, most have
considerably shorter half-lives,
typically less than 30 minutes.

The competition between mRNA translation and mRNA decay.

Figure 7-69, 7-70 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

REGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSION BY
NONCODING RNAs

Micro RNAs (miRNAs)
Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs)
CRISPR
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs)

RNA Interference In Eukaryotes

RNA Interference: short single-stranded RNAs (20–30 nucleotides)
serve as guide RNAs that selectively reorganize and bind—through
base-pairing—other RNAs in the cell. When the target is a mature
mRNA, the small noncoding RNAs can inhibit its translation or even
catalyze its destruction.

Figure 7-74 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

miRNAs Regulate mRNA Translation and Stability

microRNAs
(miRNAs)
RNA-induced
silencing complex

Figure 7-75, 7-76 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

• Single miRNA can regulate set
of mRNAs.
• Regulation by miRNAs can be
combinatorial.
• Over 1000 different microRNAs
(miRNAs) are produced from the
human genome, and these
appear to regulate at least onethird of all human protein-coding
genes.

RNA Interference Directed By siRNAs
Foreign RNA molecules
transposable elements and viruses

Dicer

small interfering RNAs
(siRNAs) ~23 bps

back to complementary RNA molecules
produced by the virus or transposable
element, leading to their rapid destruction.
• RNA interference is used as a cell defense mechanism.
• In some organisms, the RNAi activity can be spread by transferring the siRNAs
from cell to cell.
• RNAi has become a powerful experimental tool.
Figure 7-77 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

CRISPR-mediated Immunity In Bacteria And Archaebacteria
CRISPR (clustered regularly interspersed short palindromic repeat)

Two key differences comparing to RNAi:
• Bacteria and archaea have a mechanism to integrate
the viral DNA into their genomes——“vaccination”.
• The CRISPR system destroys double-stranded DNA
molecules, rather than single-stranded RNA molecules.
Figure 7-78 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Long Non-coding RNAs Have Diverse Functions in the Cell
• RNAs longer than 200 nucleotides （arbitrarily） that do not code for protein.
• Most are background “noise” of transcription and RNA processing.
Scaffold

Guiding

RNA molecules are well suited
to act as scaffolds and guiding.

Figure 7-79 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

