Nucleus and
Chromosomes
(Albert’s textbook Chapter 4)

2026/04/16

Topics
➢ The Nucleus
➢ The structure and function of DNA
➢ DNA packaging in chromosomes
➢ The high-order structure of chromosomes
➢ Chromosome modifications
➢ How genomes evolve

NUCLEUS

https://www.genome.gov/genetics-glossary/Nucleus

Nuclear Bodies——Functional Compartmentalization of The Nucleus

Membrane less structures and
highly dynamic.
Create distinct biochemical
environments by immobilizing select
groups of macromolecules to
achieve great efficiency through
Mao et al., Trends Genet., 2011
complex reaction pathways.
.
The largest is nucleolus, which is to synthesize rRNA and assemble ribosomes.
CBs are relating to RNA processing, specifically small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) and small
nuclear RNA (snRNA) maturation.
Speckles are subnuclear structures that are enriched in pre-messenger RNA splicing factors.
Refer to Chapter 6 for more.

Nuclear Lamina
The NL is a dense (~30 to 100 nm thick) fibrous meshwork.

Karoutas et al., Nat Cell Biol (2021)

•

The nuclear lamina consists of two
components, lamins and nuclear laminassociated membrane proteins.

•

The lamins are type V intermediate
filaments which can be categorized as
either A-type (lamin A, C) or B-type (lamin
B1, B2).

•

Besides providing mechanical support,
the nuclear lamina regulates important
cellular events such as DNA
replication and cell division.

•

NL participates in chromatin organization
and it anchors the nuclear pore
complexes embedded in the nuclear
envelope.

In Eukaryotes, DNA Is Enclosed in a Cell Nucleus
HeLa cells were stained with the
blue fluorescent Hoechst dye.

Figure 4-1, 9 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

dark-staining
heterochromatin

THE STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF DNA

• DNA Is The Hereditary Material.
• A DNA Molecule Contains Two Complementary Chains of
Nucleotides.
• Double Helix Structure Of DNA

DNA is the Particular Transforming Principle
Griffith’s Transformation
Experiment (1928)

Avery, McCarty, and
MacLeod Experiment

Colonies of Rough (top) and Smooth
(bottom) strains of S. pneumoniae.

The transforming principle
https://microbenotes.com/dna-experiments-griffith-avery-mccarty-macleod-hershey-chase/

The biochemical
nature of Griffith’s
transforming principle

DNA Is The Hereditary Material
Hershey–Chase experiment
(1952)

https://openstax.org/books/biology/pages/14-1historical-basis-of-modern-understanding

A DNA Molecule is Built with Nucleotides
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
five-carbon sugar
（deoxyribose）

nitrogencontaining
base

chemical polarity
3ʹ hydroxyl
Figure 4-3 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nucleoside_triphosphate
Figure 4-3 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Double Helix Structure Of DNA ——A Turning Point In Science

X-ray diffraction photo of DNA
1951

1953

1962 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine

https://physicsopenlab.org/2019/10/01/doubl
e-helix-optical-diffraction-pattern/
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2tMuMRY1oDo

Rosalind Franklin
(1920–1958)

Maurice Wilkins James Watson Francis Crick
(1916–2004)
(1916–2004)
（1928-）

A DNA Molecule Contains Two Complementary Chains of Nucleotides

• The two complementary strands wound around each other to form a double
helix, which is stabilized by weak hydrogen bonds.
• Bases are on the inside and the sugar-phosphate backbones are on the
outside.
• Purines pair with pyrimidines: A always pairs with T, and G with C. Each base
pair is of similar width and is the energetically most favorable arrangement.
• The two strands of the helix are antiparallel——the polarity of one strand is
opposite to the other strand.
Figure 4-3, 4-5 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

The Structure of DNA Provides a Mechanism for Heredity
Two most fundamental questions about heredity:
1. How could the functional information be carried in a chemical form?
2. How could this information be passed from generation to generation?

The Structure of DNA Provides a Mechanism for Heredity
Two most fundamental questions about heredity:
1. How could the functional information be carried in a chemical form?
2. How could this information be passed from generation to generation?

Sequence and Structure
DNA is a linear polymer of four
different kinds of monomers in
a defined sequence.

The double-stranded structure

DNA as a template for
its own duplication.

From DNA To Genome
The complete store of information in an organism’s DNA is called its genome
Human Genome:
~3 billions nucleotides
~2 meters long

Sequence and Structure

What’s the DNA sequence
of a human genome?
How the DNA is
packed in the nucleus?

genome.gov

The Complete Sequence Of A Human Genome
Telomere-to-Telomere

segmental duplications (SDs)
centromeric satellites (CenSat)

newly completed regions
~8% of the human genome

Nurk et al., Science, 2022

The Nucleotide Sequence of the Human Genome

Chromosomes Contain Long Strings of Genes

Chromosomes carry genes

200 times larger

Eukaryotic DNA Is Packaged into a Set of Chromosomes

Chromatin

Sequence and Structure

What’s the DNA sequence
of a human genome?
How the DNA is
packed in the nucleus?

genome.gov

CHROMOSOME PACKAGING

• Eukaryotic DNA Is Packaged into a Set of Chromosomes
• Chromosomes Contain Long Strings of Genes.
• Nucleosomes Are a Basic Unit of Eukaryotic Chromosome
Structure.

Complete Set of Human Chromosomes - Karyotype
Giemsa banding
（G-banding）

Karyotype

• The pattern of bands on chromosomes is
unique.
• It provided the initial means to identify and
number each human chromosome reliably.
• Chromosomes form in pairs are called
homologous chromosomes (homologs).

Heterochromatin
Euchromatin

Human genome contains 46
chromosomes—22 pairs autosomes
plus two sex chromosomes.
The sex chromosomes are
nonhomologous in males.
Figure 4-10, 11 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Aberrant Human Chromosomes
Spectral karyotyping

chromosome painting （Multiplex-FISH）

Karyotyping is used to detect:
Aneuploid
Trisomy
Structure variations

Figure 4-11, 12 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Aberrant Human Chromosomes
Spectral karyotyping

chromosome painting （Multiplex-FISH）

Karyotyping is used to detect:
Aneuploid
Trisomy
Structure variations

Figure 4-11, 12 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

chromosomal translocation

Chromosomes Differ Between Eukaryotic Species

Two closely related species of muntjac with very different chromosome numbers.

Chromosome number does not provide a valid indication of genetic complexity

Chromosome Must Contain a Centromere, Two Telomeres, and
Replication Origins

To replicate and protect the
end of the chromosome

To start the duplication
of the DNA

To separate two sister
chromatids

Nucleosomes Are Basic Units of Eukaryotic Chromosome Structure

Nucleosome
A chromosome is about
one-third DNA and twothirds protein by mass.

Figure 4-20, 21 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Nucleosomes Are Basic Units of Eukaryotic Chromosome Structure

Nucleosome
A chromosome is about
one-third DNA and twothirds protein by mass.
Chromatin isolated directly from an interphase nucleus appears under EM as a thread
about 30 nm thick

30 nm
Chromatin that has been experimentally decondensed, after isolation to show the nucleosomes

11 nm

“beads on a string”
Figure 4-20, 21 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Nucleosomes Are Basic Units of Eukaryotic Chromosome Structure
N-terminal tails
are subjected to
modifications.

Histones are relatively small proteins
(102–135 amino acids) and among the
most highly conserved eukaryotic proteins.

3 helices
and 2 loops

histone
octamer

2A and 2B
“handshake” dimer
Chen et al, Cell Death and Disease, 2014

Figure 4-22, 24 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Nucleosomes Are Basic Units of Eukaryotic Chromosome Structure

Histone Octamer

The Structure of the Nucleosome Core Particle

1.7 turns

A diploid human cell contains ~30 million nucleosomes.
The formation of nucleosomes converts a DNA molecule
into a chromatin thread about one-third of its initial length.
Figure 4-23, 24 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

The Bending of DNA in a Nucleosome

The minor groove is compressed
on the inside of the turn.

Figure 4-25 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

•

The DNA helix makes 1.7 tight turns
around the histone octamer.

•

142 hydrogen bonds are formed
between DNA and the histone core
in each nucleosome.

•

~1/5 of the core histones are either
lysine or arginine that are positively
charged to neutralize negatively
charged DNA.

•

The bending requires a substantial
compression of the inside minor
groove of the DNA helix.

•

The sequence preference of
nucleosomes must be weak enough
to allow other factors to dominate.

Nucleosomes Are Packed Together to Form Compact Chromatin Fiber
Histone tails in the
compaction of chromatin.

Linker Histone H1 changes the exit
path of DNA to help compaction.

Figure 4-29, 30, 61 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Nucleosomes Sliding Catalyzed by ATP-Dependent Chromatin
Remodeling Complexes
DNA in nucleosomes should be available for binding other proteins.
Yeast RSC complex

ATP hydrolysis

Chromatin remodeling complexes contain 10 or more subunits.

Figure 4-26 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Nucleosome Removal and Histone exchange Catalyzed by ATPDependent Chromatin Remodeling Complexes

A typical nucleosome is replaced on the DNA every one or two hours inside the cell.
Figure 4-27 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Chromatin Acquires Additional Variety Through the Site-Specific
Insertion of a Small Set of Histone Variants

Centromere Protein-A

The Chromatin in Centromeres Reveals How Histone Variants Can
Create Special Structures
A simple centromere in the yeast

CENP-A: Centromere Protein-A

～125 nt

Figure 4-42, 43 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

The Chromatin in Centromeres Reveals How Histone Variants Can
Create Special Structures
A simple centromere in the yeast

Plasticity of human centromere formation

CENP-A: Centromere Protein-A

A-T-rich

～125 nt
Stable inheritance requires that
each chromosome should contain
one centromere, and one only.
Figure 4-42, 43 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

CHROMOSOME MODIFICATIONS

• Modifications can happen directly on DNA.
• The core histones are covalently modified at many different
sites.
• Heterochromatin is highly organized and restricts gene
expression.
• The heterochromatic state is self-propagating.

DNA Methylation

DNA Methylation Is Maintained In DNA Replication

N. Parveen and S. Dhawan, Front. Endocrinol （2021）

Figure 7-44 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

The Function of DNA Methylation

Typical Mammalian DNA Methylation landscape

Establishing
Genomic Imprinting

The Core Histones Are Covalently Modified at Many Different Sites

Acetylation removes the
plus charge on lysine.
Reversible modifications with particular enzymes：
+ acetyl/methyl transferases
- deacetylase/demethylases

phosphorylation adds a
negative charge to a histone

The Core Histones Are Covalently Modified at Many Different Sites

“Histone Code”

Covalent Modifications – Some Specific Meanings

attracts the heterochromatinspecific protein HP1

Covalent Histone Modifications to Control Chromosome Functions
The most profound effects of the histone
modifications lie in their ability to recruit
specific other proteins to the modified
stretch of chromatin.

Trimethyl
group

ING-PHD domain binding to
methylated H3 histone

The Spreading of Histone Modifications Along a Chromosome
A Complex of Reader and Writer
Proteins Can Spread Specific
Chromatin Modifications

The Spreading of Histone Modifications Along a Chromosome
A Complex of Reader and Writer
Proteins Can Spread Specific
Chromatin Modifications

Barrier DNA Sequences Block the Spread

The Heterochromatic State Is Self-Propagating
The cause of position effect variegation in Drosophila
Position Effect

Figure 4-31, 32 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

The Heterochromatic State Is Self-Propagating
The cause of position effect variegation in Drosophila
Position Effect

The White gene in the fruit fly Drosophila
controls eye pigment production and is named
after the mutation that first identified it.

Figure 4-31, 32 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Some Chromatin Structures Can Be Directly Inherited

Chromatin structures can be inherited——epigenetic inheritance
Propagation of chromatin modifications across cell generations

Both Activating and Repressive Chromatin Structures Can Be
Inherited Epigenetically

A mutant form of H3.3 that
cannot be methylated at
K4 reduces the epigenetic
MyoD production.

CHROMOSOME HIGH-ORDER STRUCTURE

• High-order structure involves the folding of the chromatin into
a series of loops and coils.
• High-order structure is fluid and hierarchical.

Chromosomes Are Folded into Large Loops of Chromatin

Lampbrush chromosomes
in an amphibian oocyte

The interphase chromosomes of all eukaryotes are similarly arranged in loops
but are too small and fragile to be easily observed in a light microscope.
A typical loop might contain between 50,000 and 200,000 nucleotide pairs of DNA.

Figure 4-46, 47, 49 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Methods to Dissect Chromosome High-order Structure

Chromosome conformation capture (3C)

Chromosome Tracing

Bintu et al., Science, 2018
Lieberman-Aiden et al., Science, 2009

Other Methods:
SPRITE, Quinodoz et al., Cell, 2018
GAM, Beagrie et al., Nature, 2017

High-order Chromosome Conformation
Fractal Globule
Chromosome Territories

Loops
Compartment

TADs

Hansen et al., Nucleus, 2018

Homologous chromosomes
are not in general co-located.

Polytene Chromosomes Are Uniquely Useful for Visualizing
Chromatin Structures
Polyploid: multiple cycles of DNA synthesis without cell division

“larval salivary glands of Drosophila”

T.S. Painter, J. Hered, 1934

The four polytene chromosomes are normally linked together by heterochromatic
regions near their centromeres that aggregate to create a single large chromocenter.

Polytene Chromosomes Are Uniquely Useful for Visualizing
Chromatin Structures

Light Micrograph

Electron Micrograph

FISH

Eagen et al., Cell, 2015

Scale bar, 2 μm

hundreds or thousands
of copies of the genome

individual chromatin fibers
are aligned side by side

Polytene Chromosome Puffs to Promote Gene Expression
Electron microscopic view

induction
of
ecdysone

heat
shock
chromosome puff

Polytene Chromosome Puffs to Promote Gene Expression
Electron microscopic view

induction
of
ecdysone

heat
shock
chromosome puff

The decondensed portion of the
chromosome is undergoing RNA synthesis
and has become labeled with 3H-uridine,
an RNA precursor molecule that is
incorporated into growing RNA chains.

Chromatin Loops Decondense When the Genes Within Them Are
Expressed
The region of the chromosome adjacent to the
gene (red) is seen to leave its chromosomal
territory (green) only when it is highly active.

Figure 4-49, 56 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Mitotic Chromosomes Are Especially Highly Condensed
Additional 10-fold compaction in the passage from interphase to mitosis.

HOW GENOMES EVOLVE
The genes and genomes have evolved over time to
produce the vast diversity of modern-day life-forms
on our planet.
➢ Sequence similarity has become a major tool for inferring gene and
protein function.
➢ DNA sequences that have a function are much more likely to be
conserved than those without a function.
➢ Some regions are conserved while the others are nonconserved.
➢ Homologous genes—genes that are similar in both their nucleotide
sequence and function because of a common ancestry—can often
be recognized across vast phylogenetic distances.

The Detection of Multispecies Conserved Sequences

Conservation indicates
functional importance.
Some of these code for
protein, but most of them
do not, and the function
remains a mystery.
Roughly 5% of the human
genome consists of
“multispecies conserved
sequences.”

Figure 4-73 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Genome Alterations Are Caused by…
Errors in DNA replication, DNA repair, as well as by Transposable DNA Elements.

The LINEs (long interspersed nuclear elements), SINEs (short interspersed
nuclear elements), retroviral-like elements, and DNA-only transposons are
mobile DNA elements that have multiplied in our genome by replicating
themselves and inserting the new copies in different positions.
Figure 4-62 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Gene Duplication Provides Source of Genetic Novelty in Evolution
Evolution depends on the creation of new genes, as well as on the modification of those
that already exist. Genes without homologous counterparts are relatively scarce.
Segmental Duplications (1 to 400 kb in length, “low-copy repeats”) have added
about 5 million nucleotide pairs to each genome every million years.

Samonte, R., Eichler, E. Nat Rev Genet (2002)

Many duplication events are likely to be followed by loss-of-function mutations
in one or the other gene, which eventually becomes pseudogene.

Genetic Variations Contribute to Organism Evolution

Mutations in the DNA sequences
that control gene expression have
driven many of the evolutionary
changes in vertebrates.

The evolution of the globin
gene family shows how DNA
duplications contribute to the
evolution of organisms

Figure 4-74, 75, 76 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Genome Similarity is Corresponding to The Evolution Time
The basic organizing framework for comparative genomics is the phylogenetic tree,
which provides a molecular clock for evolution.

divergences
~1.2%

Figure 4-63, 64, 66 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Genome Similarity is Corresponding to The Evolution Time
The basic organizing framework for comparative genomics is the phylogenetic tree,
which provides a molecular clock for evolution.

purifying selection

divergences
~1.2%

The molecular clock for evolution is
determined not only by the degree of purifying
selection but also by the mutation rate.
Figure 4-63, 64, 66 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

The Divergence of Genome Structures
Comparison of Human and Mouse Genomes——roughly the same size and
contain nearly identical sets of genes

According to rough estimates, a total of about
180 breakage-and-rejoining events have
occurred in the human and mouse lineages.

Synteny：The stretches of
conserved gene order in
chromosomes.

6 million 80 million
years
years

Figure 4-66，67, 68 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Variation Among Humans——Population Genetics
Tracing the course of human history by analyses of genome sequences.
45,000
years ago

60,000 to 80,000
years ago

The routes of ancient
human migrations

Copy Number Variations (CNVs)
Single-nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs)

Figure 4-79 Molecular Biology of the Cell (© Garland Science 2015)

Have substantial effects on
human health, physiology,
behavior, and physique.

